.\" Copyright (c) Camilla Berglund <elmindreda@elmindreda.org>
.\" This document is licensed under the zlib/libpng license.
.\" Please see the file `COPYING' for license details.
.\"
.Dd February, 2012
.Os
.Dt DUFF 1
.Sh NAME
.Nm duff
.Nd duplicate file finder
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl 0DHLPaeqprtuz
.Op Fl d Ar function
.Op Fl f Ar format
.Op Fl l Ar limit
.Op Ar path ...
.Nm
.Op Fl h
.Nm
.Op Fl v
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility identifies clusters of duplicate files in the specified files and/or directories.
.Pp
.Nm
has three major modes of operation.
In the default mode,
.Nm
lists the duplicate files among the specified files and directories.
For each cluster of duplicates, a customizable header is printed, followed by the names of all the files in that cluster.
In excess mode (the
.Fl e
option),
.Nm
does not print a header and for each cluster prints the names of all but the first file.
In unique mode (the
.Fl u
option),
.Nm
does not print a header and lists every unique file among the specified files and directories
.Pp
If no path names are specified as arguments,
.Nm
reads path names from stdin.
.Pp
Note that as of version 0.4,
.Nm
ignores symbolic links to files, as they are by definition always duplicates of another file.
Therefore, the
.Fl H , L
and
.Fl P
options now apply only to directories.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl 0
If reading path names from stdin, assume they are terminated by ASCII NUL characters instead of newlines.
Also, when printing file names and cluster headers, terminate them with ASCII NUL characters instead of newlines.
This is useful when dealing with path names containing whitespace or other non-standard characters.
.It Fl D
Only report files as duplicates if they reside on the same device.
This is useful for example when searching for duplicate physical files that can be replaced by hard links.
.It Fl H
Follow symbolic links listed on the command line.
This overrides any previous
.Fl L
or
.Fl P
option.
Note that this only applies to directories, as symbolic links to files are never followed.
.It Fl L
Follow all symbolic links.
This overrides any previous
.Fl H
or
.Fl P
option.
Note that this only applies to directories, as symbolic links to files are never followed.
.It Fl P
Don't follow any symbolic links.
This overrides any previous
.Fl H
or
.Fl L
option.
This is the default.
Note that this only applies to directories, as symbolic links to files are never followed.
.It Fl a
Include hidden files and directories when searching recursively.
.It Fl d Ar function
The message digest function to use.
The supported functions are 
.Ar sha1 , sha256 , sha384
and
.Ar sha512 .
The default is
.Ar sha1 .
.It Fl e
Excess mode.
List all but one file from each cluster of duplicates.
Also suppresses output of the cluster header.
This is useful for example when you wish to automate removal of duplicate files and don't care which duplicates are removed.
.It Fl f Ar format
Set the format of the cluster header.
If the header is set to the empty string, no header line is printed.
.Pp
The following escape sequences are available:
.Bl -hang -offset left
.It Cm %n
The number of files in the cluster.
.It Cm %c
A legacy synonym for
.Cm %d ,
for compatibility reasons.
.It Cm %d
The message digest of files in the cluster.
This may not be combined with
.Fl t
as no digest is calculated when using thorough comparisons.
.It Cm %i
The one-based index of the file cluster.
.It Cm %s
The size, in bytes, of a file in the cluster.
.It Cm %%
A
.Sq %
character.
.El
.Pp
The default format string when not using
.Fl t
is:
.Pp
.Dl %n files in cluster %i (%s bytes, digest %d)
.Pp
The default format string when using
.Fl t
is:
.Pp
.Dl %n files in cluster %i (%s bytes)
.It Fl h
Display help information and exit.
.It Fl l Ar limit
The minimum size of files to be sampled.
If the size of files in a cluster is equal or greater than the specified limit,
.Nm
will sample and compare a few bytes from the start of each file before calculating a full digest.
This is strictly an optimization and does not affect which files are reported as duplicates.
The default limit is zero bytes, i.e. to use sampling on all files.
.It Fl q
Quiet; suppress warnings and error messages.
.It Fl p
Consider physical files (inodes) instead of hard links.
Multiple hard links to the same physical file will not be reported as duplicates.
.Pp
If used together with
.Fl u ,
only a single hard link is listed for a given physical file (inode).
.It Fl r
Recursively search into all specified directories.
.It Fl t
Use thorough (byte by byte) comparisons instead of calculating and comparing digests.
.It Fl u
Unique mode.
List unique files instead of duplicate files.
Also suppresses output of the cluster header.
.It Fl v
Display version information and exit.
.It Fl z
Do not consider empty files to be equal.
This option prevents empty files from being reported as duplicates.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.\" TODO: Fix the formatting of the example commands.
The command:
.Dl duff -r foo/
.Pp
lists all duplicate files in the directory foo and its subdirectories.
.Pp
The command:
.Dl duff -e0 * \&| xargs -0 rm
.Pp
removes all duplicate files in the current directory.
Note that you have no control over which files in each cluster that are selected by
.Fl e
(excess mode), so only use this mode if this doesn't matter.
.Pp
The command:
.Dl find \&. -name '*.h' -type f \&| duff
.Pp
lists all duplicate header files in the current directory and its subdirectories.
.Pp
The command:
.Dl find \&. -name '*.h' -type f -print0 \&| duff -0 \&| xargs -0 -n1 echo
.Pp
lists all duplicate header files in the current directory and its subdirectories, correctly handling file names containing whitespace.
Note the use of xargs and echo to remove the null separators again before listing.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Ex -std
.Sh "SEE ALSO"
.Xr find 1 ,
.Xr xargs 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "Camilla Berglund" Aq elmindreda@elmindreda.org
.Sh BUGS
.Nm
doesn't yet check whether the same file has been specified twice on the command line.
This will lead it to report files listed multiple times as duplicates when not using the
.Fl p
option.
Note that this problem only affects files, not directories.
.Pp
.Nm
no longer (as of version 0.4) reports symbolic links to files as duplicates, as they're by definition always duplicates.
This may break scripts relying on the previous behavior.
.Pp
If the underlying files are modified while duff is running, all bets are off.
This is not really a bug, but it can still bite you.
